# Daddy Funeral Speech

Some of the concepts Daddy felt were important was the importance of family and spending time together. Looking through the pictures for the various slideshows, I was reminded about how many times we went camping or two the beach growing up. We always had a good time spending time as a family on those outings.

Every other weekend after Mommy worked Friday night, we would have a Daddy day while she caught up on sleep. It was nice getting to spend lots of time with him that way as kids. Also when we were young (I get my timing from whether we lived in Orlando or Clermont haha) we would have "Daddy time," and he would take us to hang out wherever we wanted to go. For me, it would either be Sears or Bass Pro Shop. He and David would go to Sports Authority.

Daddy didn't believe in foods like cheese or black olives, so whenever we got a pizza we'd get a half one with "light cheese, chicken, and green peppers." I appreciate all of the effort he went to to be healthy for us. Looking through the pictures now that I'm in the kids stage made me realize how much older he was than me when he had kids. But that didn't stop him from being active with us, hiking together, and teaching us out to play sports like basketball and racquetball. There was one picture in the slideshow of him teaching me (or attempting to) how to do pushups at Meme's house in South Carolina.

We had some good times hiking with just the two of us. There were two outings that were particularly exciting. One we mis-judged the turn around time and ended up doing some in the dark. The other was a trail called "hospital rock" in South Carolina. He hiked it while I was at piano camp, and then we came back and did it together that weekend. We got off the trail down a steep rock and used my rope to pull ourselves back up. (Well, there was a potential we could have gotten back without the rope, but I was excited to try to use my emergency gear. After many attempts, we got it thrown over a root at the top and used that to assist.)

Daddy always encouraged us to pursue our interests. I remember when we'd be working on the yard as a kid raking leaves, he and David would talk college football and player statistics. As I got older and started becoming interested in photography, sound, computers, programming, and lately ham radio, he didn't fully understand them, but he was very happy for me and encouraging. I want to be like that with my kids to help them develop their own interests and personalities.

We first found out Daddy had cancer spring break of my junior year of college. Laura had come down with me to meet the rest of the family, and she found herself in the middle of that news. I very much appreciate her ongoing support through this whole time. We're also thankful for all the doctors he has had in the various hospitals. Probably the single person that has done the most for him was Florian, his bone marrow donor from Germany. We really appreciate what you did, Florian. We have kept in touch ever since we were allowed to find out who the donor was. He and I text about every couple weeks, and he is watching the live stream now.

I wanted to end with the most important thing about Daddy. He was a Christian. He knew he had sinned and that made him unable to be with God, since God is perfect. He believed that Jesus had died in his place to pay the punishment for his sin. Because of his trust in God's promise, we know he is in heaven right now. Daddy also was the one that explained how to become a Christian to me when I was saved, and I a will always be thankful to him for that.
